Widely hailed as the single greatest writer and poet of the English language, William Shakespeare is credited with authorship of approximately 38 theatrical works, 154 sonnets, two long narrative poems, and several shorter pieces of verse. Shakespeare is not only revered for the sheer quantity and wide-ranging genres of his writing, but also the exceptional written quality, well-executed thematic diversity, and ability to explore the timelessness of the human experience. It is precisely these qualities that have compelled literary scholars to study Shakespeare’s numerous works, particularly his plays, for centuries. With the 400th anniversary of the publication of the King James Bible occurring in 2011 and the 400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death following in 2016, scholarship on Shakespeare’s use of biblical material underwent a significant resurgence. The focus of much of this scholarship has been on simply identifying the numerous references rather than on attempting to determine why Shakespeare chose to include these specific references and, more importantly, what larger purpose they serve within the plays. As the plays written between 1600 and 1606 are widely recognized by critics as Shakespeare’s most biblical, they are ideal for studying his motivations and the different effects his biblical borrowings have on both his original and modern audiences. By examining Othello (1602) and Measure for Measure (1603), it becomes clear that Shakespeare intentionally employed biblical elements in his plays to add deeper levels of meaning and implications for audience members, thus making a thorough knowledge of biblical material essential to fully enjoying the richness of Shakespeare’s dramatic works. As modern audiences have grown increasingly biblically illiterate, the moral and emotional significances of the biblical elements Shakespeare employs are often overlooked or misinterpreted, causing contemporary audiences to be unable to fully grasp the additional levels of meaning these passages add to his plays. Only when these plays are viewed with careful attention being paid to the biblical elements can the full weight of Shakespeare’s intended message be felt.  

With Shakespeare doing the bulk of his known writing between 1589 and 1613, both his comedies and tragedies were heavily influenced by the overwhelmingly biblical culture that pervaded sixteenth- and seventeenth-century England. As Hannibal Hamlin points out, Shakespeare’s immersion in biblical culture began at birth. Born in 1564, Shakespeare and the rest of his generation were the first group accustomed to having the Bible readily available in English. Of the many circulating English translations, the Geneva was both the most recent to Shakespeare’s birth and the most influential on his writings. First published in 1560, the Geneva Bible became the most popular English version of the Bible for much of the next century. (Hamlin 9, 12). As a result of both its widespread popularity and undeniable linguistic evidence within the plays, most authorities agree that the Geneva Bible was the translation most often studied and quoted by Shakespeare (Marx General Note). Knowing the version Shakespeare used is important for modern audiences trying to identify references that hinge upon language unique to a specific translation. For example, Shakespeare is alluding directly to the Geneva Version when Othello accosts Desdemona for her alleged adultery: 
	Yet could I bear that too, well, very well. 
	But there where I have garnered up my heart, 
	Where either I must live or bear no life, 
	The fountain from the which my current runs 
	Or else dries up—to be discarded thence, 
	Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads 
	To knot and gender in (4.2.66-71, italics mine) 

Here, the use of both “fountain” and “cistern” as metaphors for marriage is found solely in the Geneva translation of Proverbs 5:15-18, 
	Drinke the water of thy cisterne, and of the rivers out of the midst of 	thine owne well. Let thy fountaines flowe forthe, and the rivers of waters 	in the streets. But let them be thine, even thine onely, and not the 	strangers with thee. Let thy fountaine be blessed, and rejoice with the wife 	of thy youth. 

The textual and thematic links between Shakespeare’s tragedy and the Geneva version of Proverbs is further strengthened by the presence of a marginal note found only in the Geneva Bible. The note informs readers that the fifth chapter of Proverbs is about “an harlot which giveth herself to another then to her husband.” Although Shakespeare’s accused adulteress is innocent of any such crime, the connection between this distinct marginalia and the play’s themes of jealousy and perceived adultery is indisputable (Hamlin 10).  

While the Geneva is the most commonly referenced translation, it is not the only version with which Shakespeare demonstrates familiarity. He also makes identifiable reference to the Bishops’ Bible (1568) and other translations, although far less frequently than the Geneva (Noble 69-76). Regardless of the version used, there are roughly 1,350 total identifiable instances where Shakespeare references or quotes directly from the Bible found throughout his plays (Bragg 142). This astoundingly high figure clearly illustrates the pervasive influence the Bible had over both the thematic and linguistic content Shakespeare incorporated into his plays. It also represents the over 1,000 opportunities modern audiences have to delve deeper into Shakespeare’s works if they have the necessary scriptural grounding.  

In conjunction with the numerous versions of the English Bible being read during Shakespeare’s lifetime, biblical knowledge was easily acquired through mandatory church attendance. During the Elizabethan era, liturgical education was of such importance that all residents were required by Recusancy Laws to attend church services every Sunday and on all major holidays (Hamlin 13). Those who failed to submit to the authority of the Church by not attending the required services, namely Roman Catholics, were listed as recusants and were subject to subsequent fines or imprisonment. Being named a recusant was equivalent to being labeled a criminal in this highly religious climate (Alchin). For Shakespeare, this meant he would have regularly attended services, each Sunday and every holiday, from the time he was old enough to be brought to church until he left Stratford-upon-Avon to make a name for himself as a dramatist in London (Hamlin 13). Like Shakespeare, his audience members would have attended hundreds, if not thousands, of church services over the course of their lifetimes. In accordance with the Reformation principle of sola scriptum, or “by scripture alone,” the Bible would have been found at the center of each of these services. Because there was no mandate that all churches use the same version of the Bible, each diocese could use whichever version they preferred, allowing churches to preach from the Geneva Bible, the Great Bible (1539), and other contemporary translations (Hamlin 15). This lack of an official version provided Shakespeare and his audiences with exposure to a wide range of biblical language and imagery that modern audiences simply cannot access. The combination of enforced mandatory church attendance and familiarity with multiple translations of the Bible endowed Shakespeare’s audiences with the ability to quickly identify biblical references and language from numerous versions, a skill that most contemporary scholars lack. It also provided Shakespeare with an exceptionally fruitful and accessible body of texts he could use to enhance his own writings.  

In addition to the biblical knowledge Shakespeare undoubtedly gained through regular church attendance, there is compelling evidence in his plays that he continued studying the Bible independently outside of the required church services. As the Bible was the “commonest and most discussed book of the day,” this is not entirely surprising; however, it does explain Shakespeare’s especially masterful manipulation and artful employment of biblical material in his own writings (Noble 22). Rather than merely alluding to biblical stories or historical episodes, Shakespeare far more frequently “quotes or adapts biblical phrases” with the specific purpose of strengthening the audiences’ emotional reaction and deepening their investment in the dramatic storylines, making extensive biblical knowledge crucial to experiencing the emotional and thematic richness of his works (Noble 20). Evidence to support Shakespeare’s continued reading of the Bible into adulthood can be found in both the number and nature of the references found in his plays. This same evidence can be used to determine which texts modern audiences need to be familiar with to strengthen their reading of Shakespeare’s plays. 

Over the course of his 38 plays, Shakespeare made identifiable allusions to or quotations from a total of 42 books of the Bible. These 42 books include 18 from the Old Testament, 18 from the New Testament, and 6 from the Apocrypha, which was originally included in the Geneva translation (Noble 20). As the Apocrypha is no longer printed in many versions of the Bible, these references are especially hard for modern audiences to comprehend, thereby affecting their overall interpretation of Shakespeare’s work. While impressive, this list only takes into consideration references for which scholars can definitively identify a biblical source and excludes Shakespeare’s non-dramatic works. This allows for the argument to be made that the true number of books to which Shakespeare alludes is substantially higher, requiring audiences to be familiar with an even lengthier list of biblical texts (Noble 20). Regardless of whether he viewed the biblical stories like any other works of secular literature or as divinely inspired Holy Writ, Shakespeare could have only acquired such an extensive mental library of reference material from thoroughly reading and studying the Bible well into his adult life. While there is no consensus among scholars about Shakespeare’s personal religious beliefs, his plays serve as indisputable evidence that he was well-versed in the stories, language, and themes of the Bible.  

In addition to these 42 books of the Bible with traceable borrowings that audiences must be able to recognize, Shakespeare makes numerous references to the Book of Common Prayer. A defining feature of the Book of Common Prayer liturgy was the congregation reciting Psalms according to a set schedule, allowing them to complete the entire book each month. One particularly well-liked version of the Psalms at the time was the Coverdale Psalter. Here again, the idea that Shakespeare was a life-long reader of the Bible is strengthened by his linguistic choices when referencing this book. Shakespeare references the Psalms more often than any other book of the Bible or religious text, making a familiarity with this book essential if the audience wishes to grasp all levels of a play’s meaning (Hamlin 17). In fact, there is not a single play in the First Folio entirely devoid of likely reference to the Psalms (Noble 47). Moreover, whenever a specific version of the Psalms can be identified for Shakespeare’s references, the overwhelming majority trace back to the Coverdale Psalter (Shaheen 20). One example of this can be found in Othello concerning a man’s life. The iconic characterization of human life from Psalms 39 is written as: “Behold, thou hast made my days as it were a span long, and mine age is even as nothing in respect of thee” (verse 6). Similarly, Iago states that “a man’s life / O, a man’s life’s but a span” (2.3.74-75). Shakespeare certainly had the Coverdale in mind when he wrote these lines as both the Geneva and Bishops’ Psalters describe man’s life as a “hand breadth” instead of a “span” (Hamlin 18). Without a wide-ranging exposure to the Bible, this specific allusion and its accompanying implications are is unintelligible to audience members, causing them to be unable to access the enriched reading experience recognizing these allusions provides. 
In addition to the Psalms, Shakespeare also demonstrates a fondness for the Apocryphal book of Ecclesiasticus. Although it is known by only a few today, it was once eagerly read by many in search of “shrewd observations on life and manners” (Noble 36). It is reasonable to assume that Shakespeare was drawn to the knowledge and ways of living advocated for in Ecclesiasticus because he not only quotes directly from it as he does the Psalms and other books, 
but he also recurrently expresses thoughts and morals aligned with those found in this text. For instance, Ecclesiasticus comments extensively on the popularity of the rich and the corresponding unpopularity of the poor. In verses 3 and 4, chapter 13 of Ecclesiasticus warms that: 

	The rich man hath done wrong, and yet he threateneth withal: the poor is 	wronged, and he must intreat also. If thou be for his profit, he will use 	thee: but if thou have nothing, he will forsake thee. 

This sentiment is echoed by Achilles in Troilus and Cressida when his unreliable friends pass him by: 
	
	What, am I poor of late? 
	’Tis certain, greatness, once fall’n out with Fortune, 
	Must fall out with men too. (3.3.77-79) 

Clearly, Shakespeare had the spirit of Ecclesiasticus in mind when he penned these words. As similar instances regularly appear in Shakespeare’s other plays, such as The Taming of the Shrew, Measure for Measure, and Hamlet, it is obvious that Shakespeare had read and studied Ecclesiasticus at length, thereby adding another religious text to the list of sources audiences need to be familiar with if they are to actively and insightfully interpret his works (Noble 36-37). As the study of the Apocryphal books has become increasingly rare, important elements of Shakespeare’s plays that hinge upon the audience’s ability to recognize these texts have become nearly indecipherable for contemporary audiences.  

Shakespeare’s repeated practice of alluding to or otherwise weaving biblical incidents into his own writing without including any proper names exemplifies the need for audience members to be well-versed in Scripture to fully comprehend the significance of these moments (Noble 21). Although this can make identifying the biblical references difficult for modern scholars and readers, this habit suggests that Shakespeare believed his audience was capable of filling in the blanks using their own reservoir of biblical knowledge. While this daunting task may prove nearly impossible today, Shakespeare was able to exploit the similarities in experience between hearing the Bible read aloud in the church and hearing the Bible referenced in the theater. While Shakespeare’s audience would have heard countless preachers explicate these passages, they were also involved in the process themselves. Whether it was by making notes of biblical references and their meanings, looking up confusing passages at home, or discussing the service’s mentioned references with friends, Shakespeare’s audiences were well conditioned to quickly recognize biblical allusions on the stage from their experience of hearing the Bible read aloud during worship (Hamlin 41). As the practice of attending church has declined over time, today’s audiences cannot rely on the experience of hearing sermons to help them recognize and interpret these same references. In the same way that writers today are aware that their audiences can quickly hear and recognize references from shows like Saturday Night Live or The Big Bang Theory, Shakespeare was aware of his audiences’ ability to do the same with biblical material and frequently capitalized on this in his plays. However, as audiences have become farther removed from the scriptural sources he references, this same technique Shakespeare uses to make his plays more relatable to his contemporary audience makes them harder for modern audiences without a strong biblical foundation to fully engage with.  

Shakespeare uses biblical material in very distinctive ways with the single definitive purpose of enhancing the content of his plays. Based on previous scholarship and my own research, it is clear Shakespeare intentionally employs biblical references in his plays. The idea that Shakespeare’s over 1,300 identifiable biblical allusions (Bragg 142) are simply the byproduct of the surrounding biblical culture or were unintentionally included is undercut by the presence of biblical references and quotations in every one of Shakespeare’s plays (Sims 1). The sheer number and persistent employment of references in his works indicates that Shakespeare was undoubtedly selecting biblical material consciously that would best serve his desired purpose of contributing additional levels of ethical and emotional meaning to the plays that require biblical literacy to comprehend. For this reason, it is critical for audience members to have extensive biblical knowledge of their own so as to discern what his intentions were with these allusions and how the presence of these references enriches their understanding of the plays. 

The idea that Shakespeare’s use of biblical material was deliberate is strengthened by the evident progression of references over the course of his plays identified by Richmond Noble. In Shakespeare’s earlier plays, the biblical borrowings are relatively easy to recognize and understand, even with the most basic exposure to contemporary biblical texts (Noble 47). For instance, Love’s Labor’s Lost (1597), one of Shakespeare’s early plays, is saturated with overt liturgical references. The most prominent of these borrowings is the repeated reference to the Homily 7 “Against Swearing and Perjury” from The First Book of Homilies. As the play repeatedly comments on King Ferdinand’s excessively strict and likely to be broken vows, it would be logical for Shakespeare to make use of the homily warning that should a man swear “to doe any thing which is…not in his power to performe: let him take it for an unlawfull and ungodly oath” (“The Homilies” 67). This close relationship between the central message of the homily and the content of Shakespeare’s play is reinforced by the repeated appearance of the words “swear,” “forswear,” and “oath,” just as they occur in the liturgical text (Shaheen 118119). For instance, the Princess’s warning of “Peace, peace, forbear! / Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear” echoes the principle tenet of this homily concerning false oaths (5.2.481, italics mine). Likewise, Katherine’s command of “Yet swear not, lest you be forsworn again” reiterates the importance of upholding oaths and not entering into vows that cannot be honored (5.2.904, italics mine). Since his play stresses oath-taking and the consequences of oath breaking, it is natural that Shakespeare would have selected this familiar homily to deepen the moral implications of his characters’ actions for audiences capable of recalling this liturgical message. Without some level of interaction with this homily, audiences can only take these ladies’ words at face value and lose the deeper moral implications of oath-breaking that come directly from the homily teachings.  

While the biblical references in the early plays were easily recognizable and straightforward, they become increasingly idiomatic and interwoven into the text as the plays progress, requiring a more extensive biblical background to identify and interpret of them (Noble 47). Consequently, it is more difficult for current scholars and audiences to detect these moments of liturgical allusion without possessing an inherent familiarity with the biblical text, like that of Shakespeare’s audience members. As a result, contemporary audiences who are not grounded in the Scriptures may overlook these more complex allusions, making their meanings seem even more obscure and causing audiences to miss out on the added levels of signifance provided by these moments that enhance Shakespeare’s plays. This phenomenon can be best observed in one of Shakespeare’s last plays.  

Commonly dated to 1611, The Tempest comes towards the end of Shakespeare’s writing career. While Gonzalo contemplates what he would do if he were to become king of the island, he states that there would be “no use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil” (2.1.168). Although the immediate source of this reference is said to be John Florio’s 1603 translation of Montaigne’s “Of the Canniballes,” which has “no use of wine, corne, or mettle,” Shakespeare’s manipulation of this passage transforms it into a subtle biblical reference. His ordering of the words with “corn” being first and “oil” added at the end can be traced to the pattern of Psalms 4:8 (Shaheen 743). Here, the Geneva Psalter states that “their corne and wine and oyle increased” when the author metaphorically describes the joy found in God’s favor. As the Psalter was said monthly in the Church of England, it is most likely from this source that both Shakespeare and his contemporaries would have gained their familiarity with this specific phrase (Shaheen 744). Due to the practice of saying the entire Psalter falling out of fashion and the wide range of possible sources for this reference, modern audiences and scholars are often perplexed by this line and unable to grasp the implications of this biblical moment. As the scriptural source is referring to the blessings bestowed upon God’s chosen people, Gonzalo’s statement that he would have no use for these items establishes his view of being self-sufficient in his own salvation. The evolution of Shakespeare’s biblical references from explicit quotations and overarching thematic borrowings to manipulations and combinations of sources intermingled within the text illustrates his advanced mastery of liturgical material and intentional employment of biblical content. This same evolution makes it increasingly necessary for audiences to have a firm foundation in the Scriptures if they are to glean more than the surface level of meaning presented in the plays. 

Another potentially puzzling characteristic of Shakespeare’s use of biblical material is the difference in the dramatic effects achieved by these Scriptural citations in his comedies versus his tragedies. While Shakespeare has the singular underlying goal of “communicat[ing], complicat[ing], and enrich[ing] the meanings of his plays by manipulating allusions to biblical texts, characters, narratives, and images,” this added dimension manifests itself differently in the comedies than in the tragedies and vice versa (Hamlin 42). Because of these differences in both use and type of reference, audiences must possess an intimate understanding of the scriptural sources and narratives being referenced in order to access these enriched and complicated meanings. As the following examples will show, Shakespeare tailors the biblical material from which he borrows to best achieve his overarching purpose of enriching the content of his plays, making the understanding of his allusions critical for truly insightful interpretation.

The employment of biblical material to add depth to certain pivotal characters is the most prominent way Shakespeare uses Scriptures in his comedies. The persistent biblical resonances would have made the audience acutely aware of both the moral and spiritual implications of the world in which the play takes place by providing them insight into a particular character’s motivations (Sims 29). These critical insights are contingent upon the audience’s ability to recognize the biblical narratives being invoked. In Measure for Measure, Shakespeare repeatedly uses liturgical references to explore the issues of human nature such as hypocrisy, sin, and the abuse of power. He does this primarily through the character of Angelo and the biblical references spoken both by and about him. Angelo’s virtue, and by extension that of mankind, is first addressed by the Duke, who says: 

	Heaven doth with us as we with torches do, 
	Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues 
	Did not go forth of us ‘twere all alike 
	As if we had them not. (1.1.35-38) 

The Duke’s assertion that Angelo cannot claim his virtue to be true until it has been tested and proven to emanate from him is echoed in Matthew 5, which states that “neyther doe menne light a candel, and put it under a bushel, but on a candelsticke; and it giveth light unto al that are in the house” (Matt. 5:15). These words spoken by Jesus reiterate the need for a person’s virtue to be reflected and seen by others in order to be authentic. They also exemplify the Duke’s purpose for leaving Angelo in charge: to provide him with the chance to test his virtue by granting him completely unchecked power over his fellow man. Angelo’s miserable failure of the Duke’s test reveals his hypocrisy not only to the world, but also to himself (Sims 40-41). Like Angelo, biblically familiar audience would be made more aware of their own fallible human nature by watching his story play out on stage, providing them with a fuller depiction of the human experience that complements the experience found in the Bible. The enlightenment supplied by the play is punctuated by references to the Bible that would have kept the eternal moral repercussions of Angelo’s actions at the forefront of their minds.  

Shakespeare primarily uses biblical allusions to emphasize the underlying themes and enhance the dramatic effect in his tragedies. (Sims 46). The treatment of Desdemona as an innocent victim in Othello exemplifies Shakespeare’s use of biblical material to sympathetically characterize tragic figures. As these enhanced characterizations are only available through the recognition and contextualization of biblical content, contemporary audiences may be unable to grasp this level of meaning, causing them to miss out on information crucial to the play’s overall message. The perception of Desdemona as blameless is established principally through biblical references, mainly those said by her husband. In fact, Desdemona herself utters but a single scriptural allusion throughout the entire play. When Othello first accuses her of adultery, Desdemona emphatically defends herself by saying “No, as I am a Christian! / If to preserve this vessel for my lord / From any other foul unlawful touch / But not to be a strumpet, I am none” (4.2.95-98). Here, Desdemona aptly references a passage from 1 Thessalonians charging Christians to uphold sexual purity: “ye should absteine from fornication…everyone of you shoulde knowe howe to possess his vessel in holiness and honour” (4:3-4). As Desdemona has in fact remained faithful to her marriage vows, the invocation of this specific biblical episode places her Christian purity in stark contrast with the darkness of Othello’s suspicion and unholy accusations. This allusion enhances the tragic elements of the play by increasing the audience’s sympathy for her if they are able to recognize the significance of the biblical references. By creating this portrait of Othello’s wife, the religious borrowings also contribute to the play’s central theme by emphasizing the “blackness of a sin” and the wickedness of the sinner (Sims 48-49, 68). As both Desdemona’s characterization and the reiteration of the play’s theme are strengthened by the recognition of biblical borrowings, the scriptural awareness of the audience is vital to the heightened interpretation of the play that biblical familiarity affords viewers.  












































































